
       
       
         
      Host Mode Programmer's Guide 

   
      Copyright 2001 Kantronics Co., Inc. All rights reserved.
      Duplication of this manual without permission of Kantronics
      Co., Inc. is prohibited.

      Purpose

      This document describes Kantronics' host mode as implemented in
      Kantronics  TNCs beginning with version 5.0. Prior versions of the
      host mode are  considered obsolete and will not be described or
      supported. A complete  description of the host mode format is
      included, providing software  programmers sufficient information
      to fully implement support for  Kantronics' products.
          
      Scope
         
      This document describes the host mode in all Kantronics TNCs. Some
      units  are single port units (i.e. one radio connection) and
      others are two-port  units. In addition, some models are capable
      of operating packet radio  only, while others add the ability to
      operate HF modes such as RTTY,  G-TOR, and Pactor.
          
      Assumptions about the reader

      This document assumes you are familiar with the operation of the
      TNC in  the command mode (i.e. from the cmd: prompt).  It further
      assumes that you  are familiar with the purpose of the various
      commands within the TNC; it  will not attempt to describe the
      purpose and/or syntax of the individual  commands.  Kantronics
      provides this document to assist programmers with the  required
      details to implement host mode support in their programs, 
	  however, Kantronics will not provide help with coding your program
	  or suggestions on how to organize your program.
          
      Conventions

      Throughout this document, the following conventions will be used.
	  Hex numbers will be shown as 0xNN where NN is the hex code. <  >
	  is used to indicate that this is a single character over the
	  serial port. For example <CTRL-C> indicates the control-c
	  character (0x03), and <FEND> indicates a single character (0xC0).
	  <FEND> indicates the character used to begin and end all host
	  frames. This character is a hex 0xC0 or decimal 192.
          
      Overview of Host Mode

      Kantronics host mode provides a standardized method of
      communication  between a host computer and the TNC. This is
	  accomplished through a special setting of the INTFACE command
	  which  enables host mode. Once the TNC is placed in host mode, all
	  communication  between the TNC and the computer will occur using
	  this host method.
	  
	  Entering Host Mode

      To enter the host mode of operation, you must first be
      communicating with the TNC. This implies that you have
      initialized the TNC through its autobaud routine and entered a
      callsign. Once this is done, place the TNC in the host mode by
      issuing two command: INTFACE HOST and then RESET.  These are
      standard terminal mode commands and can therefore be sent with 
	  any communications program. Remember each command ends with a <CR>
	  character.
          
      Flow Control

      In order to provide flow control between the TNC and computer in host 
      mode, the RTS and CTS lines must be properly connected, and the software 
      must be written to provide hardware flow control. To do this, the software 
      must detect and respond to the state of the CTS line (when CTS is 
      inactive, the software cannot send any data to the TNC), and must also 
      control the state of the RTS line. The TNC will not send any data to the 
      computer when the RTS line is inactive.    

      Host Frame Format

      Once the TNC is placed in host mode, the communication between the 
      computer and TNC occurs in "frames." All frames begin and end with a 
      special character called a FEND (Frame End). This character is a hex 0xC0 
      (192 decimal). The FEND character is not permitted to occur anywhere 
      within a frame, only at the beginning and end of the frame. the basic 
      format for host frames includes the opening FEND, a one byte "PORT" byte, 
      one byte "STREAM" byte, optional "DATA" bytes, and a closing FEND. Most 
      host frames will contain all of these, however some host frames (detailed 
      later) may not require all of these items. 

      Data from the host computer to the TNC are considered COMMAND frames, 
      instructing the TNC to perform a function, or DATA frames which provide 
      data for transmission to the TNC.    
      Data Transparency

      If it is necessary to send a FEND character as data rather than the 
      beginning or end of a frame, as special FESC (Frame escape) character must 
      be sent first, followed by a TFEND (translated FEND) character. The FESC 
      character is hex 0xDB (219 decimal) and a TFEND character is hex 0xDC (220 
      decimal). Should it be necessary to send a FESC character in the data 
      stream, a similar two-character sequence is required. To insert a  FESC 
      into the data, your program must send a FESC character followed by a TFESC 
      (translated FESC). The TFESC character is hex 0xDD (221 decimal).    
      In summary, the following special two-character translations must be 
      implemented as indicated below:    
           To send as data           Send these codes to the TNC
           0xC0                      0xDB 0xDC
           0xDB                      0xDB 0xDD    
           When you receive          Translate it to
           0xDB 0xDC                 0xC0
           0xDB 0xDD                 0xDB     
      When operating host mode, the computer controls the size of a data frame. 
      When operating packet, the host computer should insure that no frame 
      contains more than 256 data characters. The TNC paclen parameter will not 
      affect the size of data frames, as the TNC will transmit one entire host 
      frame as a single AX.25 frame. In order to remain compatible with the 
      existing packet radio network, a frame must contain no more than 256 
      characters.  The above special translations do not affect the transmitted 
      frame size. For example, if your need to send 256 <FEND> characters in a 
      single frame, you must translate each <FEND> into a <FESC><TFEND> 
      combination. This means that you will actually be sending 512 characters 
      in the data portion of the host frame.  This is legal since the TNC will 
      convert this before transmission over the radio, resulting in only 256 
      data bytes in the AX.25 frame that is transmitted.     
      Front Panel LEDs

      The front panel CON and STA lights are updated whenever a stream change 
      occurs. Therefore, a host mode program should send a host frame with a 
      command byte of C and the new PORT and STREAM bytes whenever a user 
      changes from one display channel to another. For example, to update the 
      front panel LEDs to show the status of stream B on port 1, send the host 
      frame <FEND>C1B<FEND>. 

      There may be times during program operation that you would like to issue a 
      command to determine additional status information about a specific 
      stream. One example would be to check the number of tries that have 
      occurred in trying to send a connected packet. To do this, your program 
      will need to use the TRIES command, however this command does not use the 
      PORT or STREAM byte. You can still perform this function by using the 
      following technique. First, send a host frame to switch to the desired 
      channel (e.g. <FEND>C1D<FEND>). Next send a host frame with the tries 
      command, and a STREAM byte of 0 (i.e. <FEND>C10TRIES<FEND>). This will 
      return the tries count for the last stream that was addressed.  Your 
      program should then update the front panel LEDs to the current stream 
      status as discussed above.    
      
      Data Restrictions

      Using a terminal mode, some characters are assigned special meaning. 
      <CTRL-C>, for example, returns the TNC to the cmd: prompt from the 
      converse mode. This results in many characters that cannot be easily 
      transmitted from standard terminal programs. A list of these characters 
      can be shown by issuing the DISPLAY C command to your TNC.     
      
      Using Kantronics host mode, however, makes sending and receiving any data 
      possible. Since all transmitted data is contained in a host frame, the TNC 
      will simply pass the data through for transmission, even if it one of the 
      spacial characters (i.e. <CTRL-C>). The only exceptions are the two 
      special characters <FEND> and <FESC> noted above.
          
      Buffer usage in the TNC    

      Proper implementation of flow control between the computer and the TNC 
      requires that you understand the operation of certain buffers within the 
      TNC. A simplified diagram of the buffers in the TNC is shown below. Note 
      that data from the computer are first placed in the TTY input buffer. This 
      buffer is then transferred to a second buffer, depending on the type of 
      data.     
                                         Packet buffer    
                TTY Input                Command buffer
                                         HF buffer    

      Commands are transferred to a command buffer for processing by the 
      firmware. Data which are to be transmitted on packet are transferred to a 
      packet buffer, and data intended for an HF mode (e.g. RTTY) are placed in 
      the HF buffer.

      Those TNCs which do not support HF modes will not have the HF buffer 
      indicated above, but will have the Packet buffer and Command buffer.     
      The size of the buffers can be determined by using the STATUS command. 
      When operating from the command mode (cmd: prompt), giving the status 
      command will return a line indicating FREE BYTES. This indicates the 
      number of free bytes available in the Packet buffer.    
      
      As data are moved into the packet buffer (from the TTY Input buffer), the 
      data is queued for transmission over the radio. Since the radio speed is 
      generally much slower than the computer-to-TNC speed, it is likely that 
      new data queued for packet transmission will eventually fill the Packet 
      buffer. When this happens, the data backs up into the TTY Input buffer. 
      When the TTY Input buffer is nearly full, the TNC will cause the CTS line 
      to go inactive, providing hardware flow control and stopping data from the 
      computer.    
      
      An important point here is that the TTY Input buffer is a FIFO (First In, 
      First Out) buffer. Since commands to the TNC must pass through this buffer 
      in order to reach the command buffer, any data already in the TTY Input 
      buffer must be processed before a command can be processed. A well-written 
      program will, therefore, check the status command periodically and never 
      permit the FREE BYTES number to reach zero.     
      
      When operating with a TNC that supports HF modes as well as packet, the 
      STATUS command reports two numbers in the FREE BYTES section. A typical 
      response might indicate "FREE BYTES 1520/3040", indicating 1520 bytes free 
      in the packet buffer and 3040 bytes free in the HF buffer. As long as your 
      program never allows free bytes to reach 0, you will be able to issue 
      commands to the TNC. Note that the status command will only show two 
      numbers if the TNC is currently operating in the packet mode and 
      simultaneously operating an HF mode. This is only possible in host mode.   
        

      Host-to-TNC frame format

      This diagram shows the basic construction of a host frame sent to the TNC 
      from a computer.    

      Byte 1 | Byte 2  | Byte 3 | Byte 4 | Variable Length | Last Byte
      FEND   | Command | Port   | Stream | Data            | FEND

      Communication from the host to the TNC must occur in blocks. The block of 
      data is delimited with a FEND character at the beginning and end of the 
      block.     
      
      Following the opening FEND, the next byte is the command byte. This byte 
      indicates the type of data contained in this host frame. Valid command 
      byte characters for all TNCs are C, D, or Q. For those TNCs that support 
      HF modes, there are additional command byte characters which perform 
      special functions within an HF mode. These are described in detail in the 
      Special Command Bytes section of this document.     
      Following the command byte is the PORT byte. When operating with a single 
      port (i.e. one radio port) TNC, the PORT byte must be set to an ASCII 1 
      (0x31). For dual port (i.e. two radio ports) the command byte will be an 
      ASCII 1 for radio port 1 and an ASCII 2 for radio port 2. Note that the 
      KAM uses port 1 for VHF operation and port 2 for HF operation (including 
      HF modes).    
      
      The next byte in a host frame is the STREAM byte. This indicates which 
      data stream (i.e. connected packet stream) is to be affected by the 
      command. Streams are identified by a letter, and either upper or lower 
      case may be used. The number of streams available (and therefore the 
      available stream letters) is determined by the setting of the MAXUSERS 
      command. For instance, if MAXUSERS is set to 10 (the default), the 
      available streams are A through J. Some commands do not specifically refer 
      to a stream, and in these cases the stream byte should be set to an ASCII 
      0 (0x30).   
      
      Following the STREAM byte your program inserts the actual data associated 
      with this frame. This may be a command, data to be transmitted, or simply 
      no data at all. Remember that if you need to include the FEND or FESC 
      characters as part of your data, you must apply the translations discussed 
      earlier. When entering a command to the TNC, the data portion of a host 
      frame contains the exact same syntax as entering the command from the cmd: 
      prompt.     
      
      After the data, the frame must be closed with a FEND character.     
      
      Host Command Bytes

      When the host (computer) sends a frame to the TNC, the command byte is 
      used to indicate the type of frame being sent. The following command bytes 
      are supported:     

      C
      This indicates that the frame contains a TNC command. The data portion of 
      this frame contains the command name and the arguments to the command. The 
      data portion does not contain a carriage return at the end. When sending 
      commands to the TNC, we recommend you send the full command name instead 
      of an abbreviation. Kantronics reserves the right to enhance our firmware 
      which could cause abbreviated commands to fail.     
      
      D
      This indicates that the frame contains data to be transmitted over the 
      radio. The PORT byte and STREAM byte must be used to select the radio port 
      and associated stream for the data. This command can also be used to 
      transmit "UNPROTO" packets by addressing the appropriate PORT, and setting 
      the STREAM byte to ASCII 0.
          
      For transmission of the HF modes (not packet), the PORT byte will be an 
      ASCII 2 and the STREAM byte will be ASCII 0.    
      
      Q
      This indicates that the TNC is to exit the host mode and return to the 
      command mode of operation. This command byte does not require a PORT byte 
      or a STREAM byte, so the full command is simply <FEND>Q<FEND>.    
      TNC-to-Host frame format
      
      This diagram shows the basic construction of a host frame sent to the 
      computer from the TNC.
          
      Byte 1 | Byte 2  | Byte 3 | Byte 4 | Variable Length | Last Byte
      FEND   | Command | Port   | Stream | Data            | FEND
      
      Communication from the TNC to the host occurs in blocks. The block of data 
      is delimited with a FEND character at the beginning and end of the block.  
         
      Following the opening FEND, the next byte is the command byte. This byte 
      indicates the type of data contained in this frame. 
         
      Following the command byte is the PORT byte. When operating with a single 
      port (i.e. one radio port) TNC, the PORT byte will be set to an ASCII 1 
      (0x31) for frames containing data, and to an ASCII 0 for command 
      responses. For dual port TNCs (i.e. two radio ports) the command byte will 
      be an ASCII 1 for radio port 1 and an ASCII 2 for radio port 2. Note that 
      the KAM uses port 1 for VHF operation and port 2 for HF operation 
      (including HF modes).    
      
      The next byte in a host frame is the STREAM byte. This indicates which 
      data stream (i.e. connected packet stream) received the information in 
      this frame.     
      
      Following the STREAM byte is the data associated with this frame. This may 
      be a command response, data that has been received, other informational 
      messages from the TNC, or simply no data at all. Remember that if the data 
      includes the FEND or FESC characters, it will be sent to the computer as a 
      two-character translation as discussed earlier.    
      
      After the data, the frame is closed with a FEND character.     
      
      
      TNC Command Bytes

      When the Tnc sends a frame to the host, the command byte is used to 
      indicate the type of frame being sent. The following command bytes are 
      supported:     

      C
      This indicates that the frame contains a response to a TNC command or 
      information generated by the TNC. The data portion of this frame may 
      contain a response to the command, an error message, or other information 
      generated by the TNC.     

      D
      This indicates that the frame contains data which was received from the 
      radio. The PORT byte and STREAM byte indicate which radio port and 
      associated stream received the data. When operating packet, only data 
      received from a station you are connected to will have a D for the command 
      byte.    

      If the TNC is operating in an HF mode, the STREAM byte will be 0 for all 
      received data.    

      M
      This indicates that the data in the frame was received as monitored data 
      (i.e. from a station you are not connected to). If the command byte is M, 
      the PORT byte will indicate which radio port received the data, and the 
      STREAM byte will be set to ASCII 0.     

      S
      This indicates a status message from the TNC caused by a change in the 
      link state. Such messages include *** CONNECTED TO, *** DISCONNECTED, and 
      FRMR messages.     

      There is one special form of the S command byte, which consists of two 
      <FEND> characters with the command byte S, PORT byte 0, and STREAM byte 0, 
      and a closing FEND. This frame indicates that the TNC has performed a 
      reset, and any connections that may have existed have been lost. This 
      frame also occurs when the TNC is powered up if it is in host mode.    

      R
      This indicates that the TNC has received a connect request from another 
      station, but is unable to accept the connect at this time. This is 
      analogous to the "*** connect request" message when operating in terminal 
      mode.     

      E
      This command byte only occurs when operating an HF mode and contains the 
      data being transmitted. This frame occurs at the time the data is actually 
      transmitted over the radio, allowing the operator to observe the progress 
      of data over the radio. XMITECHO must be ON for this frame to occur, and 
      since it applies only to HF modes, the PORT byte will be ASCII 2 and the 
      STREAM byte will be ASCII 0.    

      T
      This indicates the frame contains TRACE data. This frame was discontinued 
      with version 6.0 of the firmware and is no longer supported. The data in 
      this frame is RAW received data, and includes the AX.25 callsigns in the 
      bit-shifted format. No processing is done by the TNC on this data. To 
      disable this frame turn TRACE OFF.    

      I
      This special TNC-to-host command byte is used only in AMTOR, PACTOR, and 
      G-TOR to indicate whether your station is currently the sending station or 
      the receiving station. The frame <FEND>I20<FEND> indicates that you are 
      the Information Receiving Station (IRS), and the frame <FEND>I21<FEND> 
      indicates you are the Information Sending Station (ISS).    

      ?
      This special command byte indicates that this frame is the response to a 
      host inquiry command. This frame does not contain a PORT or STREAM byte, 
      and was added to the host mode starting with version 6.1 for those TNCs 
      supporting HF mode operation. For more details, see the Special Command 
      Bytes section below.


          
      Commands and Responses    

      Special Command Bytes

      When operating HF modes with a Kantronics TNC, a few special host frames 
      are required. These frames consist of the standard host <FEND> character 
      at the beginning and end, but only contain a COMMAND byte. The PORT byte 
      and STREAM byte are not present since the HF modes can only be operated 
      through one of the radio ports and only support one conversation at time. 
      The special COMMAND bytes are listed below, along with a description of 
      the function for each.    

      T
      This command byte places the TNC in transmit mode.    

      E
      This command byte is used to indicate that the TNC should continue to 
      transmit all data that may be in the transmit buffer, and then allow the 
      other station to send data to you. The exact action differs depending on 
      the mode your are operating as follows:     

      RTTY/ASCII/CW/AMTOR FEC/PSK31 - In these modes, the TNC will
      transmit all remaining data and then return to the receive
      mode, unkeying your transmitter.

      PACTOR/G-TOR - In these modes, the TNC will transmit all remaining data 
      and then perform a changeover. This allows the other station to become the 
      ISS and your station becomes the IRS.    

      AMTOR ARQ - This command byte was not implemented until version 7.1 for 
      the KAM and KAM Plus TNCs. Prior to these versions, the E command byte 
      will have no effect. Starting with version 7.1, the E command byte will 
      cause the TNC to finish sending any data and then insert the changeover 
      sequence (+?).    

      R
      This command byte indicates that the TNC should allow the other station to 
      transmit. The difference between this command byte and the E command byte 
      (above) is that the TNC returns to the receive mode (or performs the 
      changeover) immediately. Any data remaining to be transmitted is retained 
      in the transmit buffer and will be sent when the TNC again enters the 
      transmit mode. In AMTOR ARQ, this command byte was implemented beginning 
      with version 7.1    

      X
      This command byte causes the TNC to exit the current HF operating mode and 
      return to packet operation. If your station is currently linked to another 
      station in an ARQ mode (AMTOR/PACTOR/G-TOR), the TNC will attempt to 
      gracefully disconnect the link before exiting the mode.    

      A
      This command byte was implemented beginning with version 6.0 for those 
      TNCs supporting HF modes. It instructs the TNC to abort the current link 
      (or link attempt). If already linked, the TNC will attempt to perform a 
      proper disconnect. It will abort the link on the first incorrect signal 
      from the other station.    

      <CTRL-X>
      This command byte will dump the transmit buffer for the HF mode. Any data 
      which has not yet been transmitted will be discarded.    

      L
      This command byte applies only to the CW mode of operation. It causes the 
      TNC to lock the CW transmit speed to the speed of the CW signal being 
      received. This also locks the receive speed, defeating the auto-track 
      feature when receiving CW. For this reason, you should immediately send 
      the unlock command byte (see below) after sending the lock.     

      U
      This command byte applies only to the CW mode of operation. It causes the 
      TNC to unlock the CW receive speed, allowing the TNC to automatically 
      adjust the receive speed as the other station varies transmitting speed.   

      <CTRL-Q>
	  When in PSK31 mode, this command selects the QPSK mode of
	  transmission and reception.

	  P
	  When in PSK31 mode, this command selects the BPSK mode of
	  transmission and reception.

	  Z
	  When in PSK31 mode, this command causes the bar graph to zoom out.

	  1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9, or 0
	  When in PSK31 mode, this command causes the bar graph to zoom in,
	  centered at LED #n.

      0
      In PACTOR and G-TOR modes of operation, when you are linked to
      another station and you are the IRS, this command byte
      causes the speed to be set to automatic mode. In this mode, the receiving 
      station's TNC (IRS) will request speed changes based on data throughput 
      and errors received. NOTE: When a link is first established, the TNC is in 
      automatic speed mode, and will always return to automatic mode whenever a 
      changeover occurs.    

      1
      In PACTOR and G-TOR modes, when you are linked to another
      station and you are the IRS, this command byte causes the speed to
      be set to 100 baud. The TNC will not request a change in speed, even if 
      the number of errors and data being received indicate that the system 
      would benefit by increased speed. The TNC will return to automatic speed 
      mode when a changeover occurs, or when the 0 command byte frame (described 
      above) is received from the computer. When your station is the ISS, this 
      command byte is ignored.    

      2
      In PACTOR and G-TOR modes, when you are linked to another
      station and you are the IRS, this command byte causes the speed to
      be set to 200 baud. The TNC will not request a change in speed, even if 
      the number of errors and data being received indicate that the system 
      would benefit by increased speed, or that the speed should be decreased 
      due to excessive errors. The TNC will return to automatic speed mode when 
      a changeover occurs, or when the 0 command byte frame (described above) is 
      received from the computer. When you station is the ISS, this command byte 
      is ignored.     

      NOTE: This command will cause the TNC to attempt to change to 200 baud, 
      however if the change is not successful, the TNC reverts to its previous 
      state.     

      3
      In G-TOR modem, when you are linked to another station and
      you are the IRS, this command byte causes the speed to be set
      to 300 baud. The TNC will not request a change in speed, even if the 
      number of errors and data being received indicate that the speed should be 
      decreased due to excessive errors. The TNC will return to automatic speed 
      mode when a changeover occurs, or when the 0 command byte frame (described 
      above) is received from the computer. When your station is the ISS, this 
      command byte is ignored.    

      NOTE: This command will cause the TNC to attempt to change to 300 baud, 
      however if the change is not successful, the TNC reverts to its previous 
      state.     

      ?
      This command byte was implemented beginning with version 7.0 for the 
      Enhancement Board and for the KAM Plus. It causes the TNC to respond with 
      a status report, mainly concerning the HF mode status. The response from 
      the TNC will be a host frame with the command byte set to "?", one byte 
      set to an ASCII 0, and several bytes of status information. Current 
      versions report 4 bytes of status, however, future implementation may 
      expand this.     

      The response frame from the TNC will be:    
           <FEND>?0MSXY<FEND> - where MSXY are coded as follows:    
           M    One byte indicating the current mode of operation.    
                A=Packet
                B=RTTY
                C=ASCII
                D=AMTOR
                E=FEC
                F=SELFEC
                G=LAMTOR
                H=PACTOR
                I=PTLISTEN
                J=GTOR
                K=NAVTEX
                L=CW
                M=TOR Standby     
				N=GMON
				O=PSK31
           S    One byte indicating a sub-mode of operation. The byte
                contains an ASCII character as follows:    
                0=Standby
                1=Phasing
                2=Connected
                3=Disconnecting
                4=FEC
                5=SELFEC
                6=PTFEC    
           X    One byte (called status byte X). This byte is bit-
                encoded to indicate specific conditions as follows:    
                Bit 0 =    (IDLE) set to 1 when receiving IDLE
                          characters in a frame.
                Bit 1 =   (ERR) set to 1 to indicate the received frame
                          failed CRC check, or was not a valid CS
                          response frame.
                Bit 2 =   (Combined receive) set to 1 to indicate that
                          the data was constructed through the use of
                          error correction (i.e. Golay error correction
                          for G-TOR or Memory ARQ for Pactor).
                Bit 3 =   (RQ) set to 1 to indicate an RQ frame. If you
                          are the ISS, it indicates that the receiving
                          station has asked for a repeat of the last
                          data due to received errors. When you are the
                          IRS, it indicates that the transmitting
                          station has sent the same data that you have
                          already received. This means that the sending
                          station did not properly copy your
                          acknowledgement (CS code).
                Bit 4 =   (Huffman) set to 1 to indicate that this
                          frame contains data which uses Huffman
                          compression.
                Bit 5 =   (ISS) set to 1 to indicate that your station
                          is currently the ISS.
                Bit 6&7 = (Speed) these two bits indicate the current
                          speed of an ARQ link or the PSK31 mode. The
                          coding of the bits is:
                          00 = 100 baud or BPSK31
                          01 = 200 baud or QPSK31
                          10 = 300 baud
           Y    One byte (called status byte Y). This byte is bit-
                encoded to indicate specific conditions as follows:    
                Bit 0 =    reserved (set to 0).
                Bit 1 =   (PTT) PTT is active.
                Bit 2 =   (Changeover) changeover in progress
                Bits 3-7 = reserved (set to 0).
          
      Copyright 2001 Kantronics Co., Inc. All Rights Reserved.
      Duplication of this manual or the firmware without permission of
      Kantronics Co., Inc is prohibited.    


