                             PACTERM 2.0


                              OWNERSHIP

Pacterm 2.0 is the property of Kantronics Co., Inc. 

Pacterm 2.0  is (c) Copyright 1996 by Kantronics Co., Inc. All rights reserved. 

                            TERMS OF USE

It is the user's responsibility to be familiar with these terms and to accept them before using Pacterm. In summary, the terms state that: (1) Pacterm is licensed to users who conform to the conditions of the license agreement in the printed documentation, with Kantronics reserving the
right to terminate the license agreement if any condition(s) of the agreement are not met, and (2) Pacterm is supplied "as is" with the user bearing all risks with respect to the quality and performance of Pacterm.

                            INTRODUCTION 

Pacterm is a DOS-based terminal communication program used to control the flow
of information between your PC compatible computer and Kantronics KPC and KAM
products. Pacterm is shipped with the these TNCs to help you get started using
them for packet radio communication. 

Pacterm is for use while the TNC is operating in NEWUSER Interface Mode (the
default mode of operation) or in TERMINAL Interface Mode, which includes all
NEWUSER commands and many more.

NOTE: You may continue using Pacterm with your TNC after you get up and 
running, but you do not need to limit yourself to Pacterm. The TNC 
will operate with a wide range of terminal communication programs.

                      OUR ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT YOU

We assume the following when you use Pacterm with your TNC:

 *  You are using a PC compatible computer that meets the specifications given
    in your TNC documentation.

 *  You know, or are learning, how to use DOS with your PC compatible computer
    for basic operations needed to install and run Pacterm.

 *  You have a TNC that is connected, or that will be connected, to your PC
    computer, as described below and in the TNC manual.

 *  You know, or are learning, how to use your TNC in NEWUSER and/or TERMINAL
    Interface Mode, along with your PC compatible computer and your transceiver,
    for packet radio operations.

                       OVERVIEW OF PACTERM FUNCTIONS

You can use Pacterm's MAIN Menu and/or TERMINAL SCREEN to do the following:

 *  Establish communications between your computer and your TNC, while it is
    operating in NEWUSER or TERMINAL Interface Mode.

 *  Select the COM PORT and BAUD RATE to use for the current Pacterm session
    (i.e., until you exit to DOS).

 *  Send commands from Pacterm to your TNC.

 *  Send data from Pacterm (i.e., from your computer) to your TNC and receive
    data from your TNC.

 *  VIEW, PRINT, and/or SAVE information sent from your TNC to your computer.

 *  End a session, either of two ways: (1) Disconnect and EXIT to DOS or (2)
    EXIT directly to DOS.


Other uses of Pacterm are as follows:

 *  SEND a file from your computer to your TNC, for transmission.

 *  Switch the TNC at any time into Command Mode, making it ready to accept
    commands instead of transmitting data.

 *  Control the flow of data between Pacterm and your TNC as follows: (1) from
    Pacterm to your TNC -- switch between ONLINE, with your input sent
    immediately, and OFFLINE, with input stored in a type-ahead buffer and sent
    when you go back ONLINE and (2) from your TNC to Pacterm --  STOP (hold) or
    START the flow of data from your TNC to your computer. 

NOTE: As described in the printed manual and shown on the Pacterm MAIN Menu
Screen, Pacterm can be used with KAM TNCs to operate in HF non-packet modes.





                               QUICK START

To get started using Pacterm to communicate with your TNC, do the following:

 1. Copy the file PACTERM.COM from your Kantronics Program and Information Disk
    to your hard drive, using DOS or following directions on the disk.

    NOTE: You can INSTALL Pacterm automatically, using the Kantronics Program
    and Information Disk: Type and enter "TNC", then follow the on-screen
    instructions, which will also copy this file to the directory you specify.

 2. Connect your TNC to COM1 or COM2 of your computer, using a standard RS-232C
    serial modem cable, and make sure the TNC is turned ON.

 3. Use DOS to change to the drive and directory to which you copied Pacterm.

 4. Start Pacterm by typing PACTERM and pressing the ENTER key.




 5. When Pacterm starts, you will be on the MAIN Menu. Use the SETUP functions
    on the MAIN menu as needed to establish communication with your TNC. The
    BACKSPACE key will take you to the TERMINAL Screen. Follow the on-screen
    instructions and use the MAIN Menu and the TERMINAL Screen to control the
    session and communicate with the TNC.

 6. If you get the "Pacterm Cannot Communicate" screen the first time you try to
    go to the TERMINAL Screen, be sure the TNC is turned ON and/or press the F7
    key to switch the current COM port from COM2 to COM1. If neither of these
    works, review other possible problems (described on the screen) and keep
    trying until you establish communication.

 7. The first time your TNC is used, it will run an AUTOBAUD routine to
    coordinate the TNC's BAUD rate with the BAUD rate of the terminal
    communication software in use at the time -- in this case, Pacterm. Follow
    the on-screen instructions: press the "*" key when the message to do so is
    displayed, enter your CALLSIGN when asked for it, and then proceed.

REMINDER: The Pacterm manual contains much additional information, including:
detailed explanations of each function, helpful hints, cautions that warn of
possible problems, and technical notes.

